Skin is no less vital than our heart or spine or brain. Without it the fluids that compose us **evaporate**, and the outside world pours into us and infects us and we quickly die. So skin care is **extremely** important. But effective skin care goes far **beyond** applying things to its surface. Skin consists of three anatomical layers.  

The bottom one is mostly fat and connective **tissue**. The other two are more interesting. The outermost is the **epidermis**. It’s about a millimeter thick, like a sheet of paper, but an amazing amount happens in that millimeter. The primary cells of the epidermis are called **keratinocytes**. These produce the keratin **protein** that makes up most of our skin and the entirety of our fingernails and hair. Intermixed with these proteins is a **collage of immune cells** and tiny **nerve** fibers, as well as cells that produce the **melanin** that gives all skin its color. All of these cells are extremely sensitive to our environment, and they react and change accordingly. **The epidermis is constantly regenerating** itself, as almost no other part of the body can. The millimeter-thick layer is itself divided into strata representing cells of different ages.  

The **basal** layer contains stem cells, which continually divide, producing new cells. That process happens more readily in youth. But throughout life, the skin is always generating new cells that **push older** ones up toward the **surface**. By the time they get there, they are mostly dead, flat, dehydrated, and stuck together such that they are visible to the naked eye. The entire cycle takes about a month and serves to continually rebuild the surface of the skin.  

Below the epidermis is the **dermis**, a layer mainly composed of two proteins: collagen and elastin. Woven together, they give skin its elasticity and strength. Leather, for example, is pure dermis. Coursing through the epidermis and the dermis are **networks of nerves** that can detect even the slightest changes in our environment, discerning the weight of a mosquito or the difference between a 68-degree and a 72-degree office. This network is crosshatched with microscopic **blood vessels** that expand to cool the body during exercise and stress, and that cause us to flush and make our emotions manifest to the world. There are also clusters of relatively enormous structures called **follicles**. These create our hair, which allowed pre-human species to move into cold climates.  

The skin also contains **three types of glands** that secrete oils and other compounds. The basic sweat glands (known as eccrine glands) secrete water to cool the body. Sebaceous glands secrete oily sebum that lubricates the skin—so that we don’t dry out and crack open, compromising the barrier and allowing microbes in, causing death. The airborne chemicals that account for our bodily odors are a product of bacteria on our skin, especially in the armpits and groin, feeding on our oils.  

These **microbial populations** are influenced by the amounts and types of oils we exude, as well as other compounds like sodium, urea, and lactate that pour out of us when we sweat. Sweat has also recently been found to contain peptides with **antimicrobial** properties, like dermicidin, cathelicidin, and lactoferrin. These compounds seem to have some part in maintaining and **restoring** microbial balances. If you ever feel self-conscious about sweating, you might explain to those around you that your body is simply partaking in an elaborate and mysterious biochemical ballet.  

The fact that we carry around some microbes has long been known—for as long as scientists have been able to grow cultures of bacteria, they have known that swabbing human skin is a reliable way to start a **prodigious microbial garden**. But only over the course of the past decade has new DNA sequencing technology begun to reveal the scale and diversity of microbial life. The microbes on our skin, **combined** with those in our **digestive** tracts, account for several pounds of our body **weight**. There are **more** microbial cells in and on each of us than **human cells**.  

While we have long thought about our skin as a barrier to separate us from the outside world, growing knowledge about the microbiome suggests that skin is instead a **dynamic interface** with our environment. These microbial ecosystems really amount to extensions of ourselves. Like the microbes that fill our guts, the microbes on our skin rarely cause disease. If anything, they may help protect us from disease. And everything we do—and don’t do— to our skin has some effect on these populations. When we clean ourselves, we at least temporarily alter the microscopic populations—either by removing them or by altering the resources available to them. Even if we do not use cleaning products that specifically say they are “antimicrobial,” any chemistry applied to the skin will have some **effect** on the environment in which the microbes grow.  

Soaps and astringents meant to make us drier and less oily also **remove the sebum** on which microbes feed. Because scientists and doctors didn’t have the technology to fully understand the number or importance of these microbes until recently, very little is known about what exactly they’re doing there. This pH-driven model of skin health does not **bode** well for soaps. A soap, by definition, has a highly basic **pH of 10.3**. This is by design. The less basic a soap is, the less well it binds to the oils we seek to remove. Dove has a **pH of 7**, because of the addition of the emollient. This makes it less drying. In other words, it is less able to bind and remove oils. In other words, it is less good at its job.


src - [James Hamblin - Clean: The New Science of Skin Hardcover - (ISBN 0525538313)](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0525538313)